the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu the topic for today is going
to be equations of planes
and how it relates how they relate to
linear systems and matrices as we have
seen during Tuesday's
lecture
so let's start again with equations of
planes so
remember we've seen
briefly that an
equation for a
is of a
form
ax plus b y + C zal D where a b c and d
are just
numbers okay and so this expresses the
condition for a point at coordinates XYZ
to be in the
plane and so an equation of this form
defines a plane
so let's see how that works
again so let's start with an example
let's say that we want to find an
equation for a
plane through the
origin with normal
Vector let's say Vector n equals let's
say the normal Vector
1510 okay so how do we find an equation
of this
plane
well
remember
that we can get that equation by
thinking geometrically so what's our
thinking going to
be well so we have the X1 y z
AIS
and we have this Vector
n
1510 and it's supposed to be
perpendicular to our plane and our plane
passes for the origin here okay so we
want to think of a
plane that's perpendicular to this
vector well when is a point in that
plane let's say we have a point
P at coordinates
XYZ well the condition for p to be in
the plane should be that we have a right
angle
here okay so p is in the
plane whenever op do n is
zero and if we write that explicitly
well Vector op has components XYZ and
has components 510 so that will give us
x + 5 y+ 10 Z equal Z okay that's the
equation of our
plane
now let's think about a slightly
different
problem so let's do another problem
let's try to find the equation of a
plane
through a point p 0 with coordinates say
2 1 - one
and with normal Vector again the same
guy
1510 okay
so how do we find an equation of this
thing
well we are going to use the same method
in fact let's think first for a
second so I said we have a normal Vector
n and it's going to be perpendicular to
both planes at the same time so in fact
our two planes will be parallel to each
other the difference is well before we
had a plane that was
perpendicular to n and passing through
the origin and now we have a new
plane that's going to pass well not
through the origin but through maybe
this point p 0 and I don't really know
where it is but let's say for example
that p 0 is
here then I will
just have to shift my plane so that
instead of passing for the origin it
passes through this new
Point okay
so how we going to do that well now for
a point P to be in our new plane we need
the vector no longer op but p 0 P to be
perpendicular to
n okay
so p is in this new
plane if the vector p 0
p is perpendicular to
n and now let's think for a second
what's Vector p 0 P well we take the
coordinates of p and we subtract those
of p
0 so that should be x -
2 y
-1 and Z +
1 dot product with
1510 equals
z or let's expand this well we
get x - 2 plus 5 * y - 1 + 10 * Z +
1 = 0
or let's put the constants on the other
side we get x + 5 y + 10 Z equals well
here we have - 2 becomes 2 - 5 becomes 5
10 becomes minus 10 I think we end up
with -3
so see the only thing that changes
between these two equations is the
constant term on the right hand side the
thing that I call D and the other common
feature is that the coefficients of X Y
and Z 1 5 and 10 correspond exactly to
the normal Vector okay so that's
something you should remember about
planes these coefficients here
correspond exactly to a normal vector
and well this constant term here roughly
measures how far you know when you move
from so if you have a plane through the
origin the right hand side will be zero
and if you move to a parallel plane then
this number will become something
else so how actually could we have found
that minus three more quickly well we
know that the first part of the equation
is like
this okay and we know something else we
know that the point p 0 is in the
plane so if we plug the coordinates of p
0 into this well X is 2 + 5 * 1 + 10 *
-1 we get- 3 so in fact the number we
should have here should be minus three
so that P0 is a
solution okay
so let me point out so maybe I'll put a
one here
again
so these three numbers 15 10 are exactly
the normal vector
okay and one way that we can get this
number here is by Computing the value of
the left hand
side at the point p 0 we plug in the
point p 0 into the left hand
side
okay any questions about that
no okay by the way I mean of course a
plane doesn't have just one equation it
has infinitely many equations because if
I take instead say If I multiply
everything by two 2x + 10 y + 20 Z = - 6
is also an equation for this plane okay
that's because of course we have normal
vectors of all sizes we can choose how
big we make it
so again just to repeat the single most
important thing here in the
equation a x + b y + CZ = D the
coefficients a b
c give us actually a normal
Vector to the plane
so that's why in
fact what matters to us mostly is
finding the normal vector and in
particular if you remember last time I
explained something about how we can
find normal Vector to the plane if we
know points in the plane namely we can
take the cross product of two vectors
contained in the plane
okay so let's just do an example to
see if we completely understand what's
going
on
so let's say that I give you the vector
with components 1
21 and I give you the plane x + y + 3 Z
= 5 so do you think this do you think
that this Vector is parallel to the
plane perpendicular to
it
nether okay I'm starting to see a few
votes
okay
so I see that most of you are answering
number two this Vector is perpendicular
to the plane uh there are some other
answers too well let's try to figure it
out okay so
let's do the example say V is 1
to1 and the
plane is x + y + 3 Z = 5 so let's just
draw you know that plane anywhere it
doesn't really matter let's first get a
normal Vector out of it well to get a
normal
Vector to the
plane what I do is I will take the
coefficients of X Y and Z so that's
13 okay so 13 is perpendicular to the
plane how do we get all the other
vectors that perpendicular to the plane
that are perpendicular to the plane well
all the perpendicular vectors are
parallel to each other okay so that
means that they're just obtained by
maybe multiplying this guy by some
number okay 226 for example would still
be perpendicular to the plane uh 1 half
one half three halves is also
perpendicular to the plane but now see
these guys are not proportional to each
other so V is not perpendicular to the
plane so it's not
perpendicular to the plane
being perpendicular to the plane is the
same as being parallel to its normal
Vector now what about testing if V is
instead parallel to the plane well it's
parallel to the plane if it's
perpendicular to n well let's check
that so let's try to see if
it's
pendicular to
n well let's do V do
n that's 1
21 do 1
13 you get 1 + 2 -
3 that's zero so
yes so if it's perpendicular to n
means maybe
it's somewhere like
that it's actually going to be parallel
to the
plane okay any questions yes when you
plug the vector into the equation you
get zero what is that what's the signic
ah when you
plug um let's see so if I plug the
vector into the plane
equation so
x 1 + 2 - 3 well the left hand side
becomes zero so it's not a solution of a
Plaine equation okay so I should say
okay so there's two different things
here one is the point with coordinates 1
2us one is not in the
plane okay so what that tells
us is
that if I put my vector v at the
origin okay then the point here is not
going to be in the plane
on the other hand your right the left
hand side evaluates to zero what that
means is If instead I had taken the
plane x + y + 3 Z equal 0 then it would
be inside and the plane x + y so this
one is x + y + 3 Z = 5 x + y + 3 Z = 0
would be a plane parallel to it but
through the
origin so that would be another way to
see that the vector is parallel to the
plane if we move the plane to a parallel
plane through the origin then the end
point of the vector is in the
plane okay that's another way to
convince
yourselves um any other
questions Okay so
let's move
on so last time we saw about matrices we
learned about matrices and linear
systems so let's try to think now about
linear systems in terms of equations of
planes and intersections of planes I
mean remember a linear system it's a
bunch of equations let's say a 3X3
linear system it's three different
equations each of the equation is the
equation of a plane so in fact if we try
to solve a system of equations that
means actually we're trying to find a
point that is on several planes at the
same
time
so one more board
here so let's say that we have a 3X3
linear
system and just to take an example
doesn't really matter what I give you
but let's say I give you x
+ z = 1 X + Y =
2 x + 2 y + 3 Z equals
three well what does it what what does
this mean what does it mean to solve
this it means we want to find XYZ which
satisfy all of these
conditions so let's just look at the
first equation first well the first
equation says our point should be on the
plane which has this
equation then the second equation says
oh our point should also be on this
plane okay so in fact if you just look
at the first two equations that means
you have two
planes
and the solutions
so these two
equations determine for you two planes
and two planes
intersect in a
line
okay
now well what happens with a third
equation that's actually going to be a
third plane
so if we want to solve the first two
equations we have to be on this line and
if we want to solve the third one we
also need to be on another plane and in
general three planes intersect in a
point because this line of
intersection so
okay so three planes intersect in a
point and one way to think about it is
that the line where the first two points
sorry the line with where the first two
planes intersect meets the third plane
in a point and that point is the
solution to the linear
system okay
so the
line let's say formed by V so this is
mathematical notation for the
intersection between the first two
planes
intersect the third plane in a
point which is going to be the
solution okay
so the solution actually how do we find
it Well one way is to draw pictures and
try to figure out where the solution is
but that's not how we do it in practice
if we are given the equ
equations uh the solution is
given sorry so let me use Matrix
notation remember we saw on Tuesday that
the solution to axal
B is given
by x equal a inverse
B okay and we get from here to Here by
multiplying on the left by a inverse a
inverse a x simplifies to X x equals a
inverse B and once again it's a inverse
B and not b a inverse if you try to set
up the multiplication ba inverse doesn't
work the sizes are not compatible you
can't multiply the other way
around okay
so that's pretty good
unless well unless it doesn't work that
way okay and what could go wrong well
let's say that our first two planes do
intersect nicely in a line but let's
think about the third plane maybe the
third plane does not intersect that line
nicely in a point maybe it's actually
parallel to that
line okay
so let's try to think about this
question for a
second oh sorry this is too far
so let's say that the set of solutions
to a free by fre linear system is not
just one
point so we don't have a unique solution
that we can get this way what could
happen what do you think would
happen okay I
see answers
number three and five seem to be
dominating there's also a bit of answer
number
one and in fact these are pretty good
answers I see even some of you figured
out that you can answer one and three at
the same
time or three and five at the same time
uh I yet have to see somebody with three
hands answer all three numbers at the
same time but uh okay so indeed we'll
see very soon that we could have either
no solution a line or a plane
the other answers well two points two
solutions uh we will see is not actually
a possibility because if you have two
different solutions then the entire line
through these two points is also going
to be made of
solutions a tetron is just there to you
know amuse you uh it's not actually a
good answer to that question it's not
very likely that you will get a tedron
out of intersecting planes a plane is
indeed possible and I don't know is
still okay for a few more
minutes but we are going to get to the
bottom of this and then we will
know okay so let's try to figure out
what can
happen so let me go back to my
picture and so I had my first two planes
the detal line and now I have my third
plane and maybe my third plane is
actually parallel to the
line but doesn't pass through it
well then I'm afraid that there's no
Solutions okay because to solve the
system of equations I need to be in the
first two planes so that means I need to
be in that vertical line well that line
was supposed to be red but I guess it
doesn't really show up as
red uh and it also needs to be in the
third plane but the line and the plane
are parallel to each other there's just
no place where they intersect okay so
there's no way to solve all the
equations
on the other hand the other thing that
could happen is that actually the line
is contained in the
plane and then well it means any point
on that line will actually solve
automatically the third
equation okay so if you try solving a
system that looks like this by hand what
you will notice you know if you do
substitutions eliminations and so on
what you will notice is that you know
after you've dealt with two V equations
the third one here would actually turn
out to be the same as what you got out
of the first two it doesn't give you any
additional information it's as if you
had only two
equations the previous
case would be when actually the third
equation contradicts something that you
can get out of the first two for example
maybe out of the first two you got X
Plus zal 1 and the third equation is X
plus zal 2 Well it can't be one and two
at the same time
um maybe another way to say it is that
this picture is one where you can get
you know out of the equations you get a
number equals a different number that's
impossible and that picture is one where
out of the equations you get 0 equals 0
which is certainly true but isn't very
useful equation so you can't actually
finish
solving okay so let me write that
down
so unless the third
plane I say is
parallel to the
line where P1 and P2
intersect
so then there's two
subcases if
the
line of intersections of P1 and P2 is
actually
contained in P3 in the third plane then
we have infinitely many
solutions namely any point on the line
will automatically solve the Third
equation now the other possibility the
other subcase is
if the
line of intersection of P1 and
P2 is
parallel to
P3 and not contained in
it then we get no Solutions
okay so again just to show you the
pictures once again when we have the
first two
planes they give us a
line and now depending on what happens
to that line in relation to the third
plane various situations can happen so
if the third
line Just Hits sorry if a line hits the
third plane in a point then that's going
to be our
solution and if that line instead is
parallel to the third plane well if it's
parallel and outside of it then we have
no solution if it's parallel and
contained in it actually then we have
infinitely many
solutions okay so going back to our list
of
possibilities that
means well let's see what can happen
so no solution well we've seen that
happens when the line where the first
two planes intersect is to the third one
that
exists two points well that didn't come
up okay and as I said the problem is if
the line of intersection of the first
two planes actually has two points that
are in the third
plane well then that means actually the
entire line must also be in the third
plane
so if you have two solutions you have
more than two actually in fact you have
infinitely many and we've seen that can
happen okay tetraedron still doesn't
look very
promising um what about a plane well
that's a case that I didn't explain
because I've been assuming that P1 and
P2 are different planes and they
intersect in a line but in fact well
they could be parallel in which case we
already have no solution to the first
two equations
or they could be the same plane and now
if the third plane is also the same
plane you know if all three planes are
the same plane well then you have a
plane of solutions you know if I give
you three times the same equation that
is a linear system it's not a very
interesting one but it is a linear
system okay and I don't know is no
longer a solution
either okay any
questions yes
okay so that's a very good question
question is what is the geometric
significance of an equation like X+ y +
z say this one equals to 1 2 three or
something
else well if the equation is x + y+ z
equal Z it means that our plane is
passing through the
origin and then if we change the
constant it means we move to a parallel
plane so so the first guess that you
might have is that this number on the
right hand side is the distance between
the origin and the plane it tells us how
far from the origin we are that is not
quite
true uh in fact that would be true if
the coefficients here form the unit
Vector then this guy would just be the
distance to the
origin otherwise you have to actually
scale by the length of this normal
vector and I think there's a problem in
the notes that will show you exactly how
this works okay but you should think of
it roughly as how much have we moved the
plane away from the
origin that's the meaning of this last
term d uh that's in the right hand side
of the
equation okay
so let's try to think
about what exactly this case you know
how how do we detect now in which
situation we are because that's all very
nice in the
picture but you know it's difficult to
draw planes in fact when I draw these
pictures I'm always very careful not to
actually try to pretend to draw an
actual plane given by an equation or
when I do then it's blatantly
false um it's difficult to draw a plane
correctly so
instead let's try to think about it in
terms of
matrices in particular what's wrong with
this you know why can't we always say
the solution is xal a inverse
B
well
so the point is actually you cannot
always invert a matrix
okay so recall we've seen this formula
that a inverse is one determinant of
a times The adjoint
Matrix and well we've learned how to
compute this thing remember we had to
take minors then flip some signs and
then
transpose well that step we can always
do we can always do these
calculations but then at the end we have
to divide by the
determinant well that's fine if the
determinant is not zero but if the
determinant is zero then certainly we
cannot do that
so in fact what I didn't mention last
time is that the Matrix is invertible
that means it has an
inverse exactly when its
determinant is not
zero okay so that's something we should
remember so if a determinant is not zero
then we can use our method to find the
inverse and then we can solve using this
method if not then not
yes that's correct so what I'm saying is
we can invert The Matrix a if the
determinant is not zero and if you look
again at the method that we saw last
time so first we had to compute this
adjoint Matrix and these operations we
can always do if we given a 3 by3 Matrix
we can always compute the adjoint and
then the last step to the inverse was to
divide by the determinant and that we
can only do if the determinant is not
zero so if we have a matrix whose
determinant is not zero then we know how
to find the
inverse if the determinant is zero then
of course this method doesn't work but
I'm saying actually even more there
isn't an inverse at all it's not just
that our method fails I cannot take the
inverse of a matrix with determinant
zero and geometrically
well precisely the situation where the
determinant is not zero is exactly this
nice usual situation where the three
planes intersecting a point while the
situation where the determinant is zero
is this situation here where the line
determined by the first two planes is
parallel to the third
plane okay
so let me emphasize this again
and let's see again what
happens okay so let's start with an
easier
case so it's called the case of a
homogeneous system it's called
homogeneous because it's the situation
where the equations are invariant under
scaling so a homogeneous system is one
where the right hand side is zero okay
there's no B if you want the constant
terms here are all zero 0 0 0 okay so
this one is not
homogenous so let's see what happens
there
well so what that
means you know
so let's take an example instead of this
guy we could take x + z = 0 x + y = 0
and x + 2 y + 3 Z also equals
z well can we solve these
equations yeah I think actually you
already know a very simple solution to
these
equations yeah you can just take X Y and
Z all to be
zero so
there's
always an obvious
solution namely 0 0 0
and in mathematical jungon this is
called the trivial
solution
okay
so there's always this trivial solution
and what's the geometric
interpretation well having Zer here
means that all three planes pass through
the origin so certainly the origin is
always a
solution so the origin is always a
solution
because the free plan
Plus for the
origin
okay so now there's two subcases
okay one case is if a determinant of a
matrix a is non
zero well that means
that we can invert a
so if we can invert a then that means we
can
solve the system by multiplying by a
inverse if we multiply by a inverse well
we'll get xal a inverse * 0 which is
zero okay and that's the only
solution because well you know if ax is
zero then let's multiply by a inverse we
get a inverse ax that's xal a inverse 0
that's 0 we get xal 0 we've solved
it okay no other
solution so to go back to these pictures
that we all enjoy
it's it's this
case okay
now the other
case if a determinant of a equals Zer
then it means that
actually this doesn't quite
work
so let's see what does it mean that DET
of a is zero well remember the entries
in a they are the coefficients in the
equations okay but now the coefficients
in the equations
they're exactly the normal vectors to
the planes so that's the same thing as
saying that the
determinant of the three normal vectors
to our threee
planes is
zero
so that
means that N1 N2 and N3 are actually in
the same plane it's called co- planer
okay these three vectors are
coer so let's see what
happens so I claim it will correspond to
this situation here let's draw the
normal vectors to these three
planes okay well it's not very easy to
see
but okay so I've tried to draw the
normal vectors to my
planes well they're
all in the direction that's
perpendicular to the line of
intersection they're all in the same
plane so if I try to form a box you know
aipad with these three normal vectors
well I will get something that's
completely flat and has no volume has
volume
zero Okay so
the
parip has volume
zero and the fact that the normal
vectors are
CER tells us that in
fact well let me start a new
Blackboard if we okay so now let's say
that our normal vectors N1 N2 N3 are all
in the same plane
and let's think about the direction
that's perpendicular to N1 N2 and N3 at
the same
time okay I claim that will be the line
of intersection
so let me try to draw that picture again
so we have three
planes okay now you see why I prepar the
picture in advance it's
easier I do it
beforehand and I said there normal
vectors are all in the same plane so oh
what else do I know I know that all
these planes pass through the origin
okay so the
origin is somewhere in the intersection
of the three
planes
now I say actually the normal vectors
to my three
planes well that's kind of hard to draw
but are all actually co-
planer okay so N1 N2 N3 determine a
plane
well now if I look at the line through
the origin that's perpendicular to N1 N2
and N3 so perpendicular to this red
plane
here that's a terrible
picture it's supposed to be in all the
planes okay you can see that better on
the side
screens okay and why is that well that's
because my line it's perpendicular to
the normal vectors so it's parallel to
the planes it's parallel to all the
planes now why is it in the planes
instead of parallel to them well that's
because my line goes through the origin
and the origin is on the plane so
certainly my line has to be contained in
the planes not parallel to
them okay so the
line
through the
origin and
perpendicular to the
plane of N1 N2 2 and
three is parallel to all three
planes and because the planes go through
the
origin It's
contained in
them okay so what happens here is I have
in fact infinitely many
Solutions and how do I find these
Solutions well if I want to find
something that's perpendicular to N1 N2
and
N3 well if I just want to be
perpendicular to N1 and N2 I can take
their cross product
exactly so
for example if I do N1 cross
N2 is perpendicular to N1 and to
N2 and also to N3 because N3 is in the
same plane as N1 and N2 so if you're
perpendicular to N1 and N2 you're also
perpendicular to
N3 it's
automatic um
so it's a non-trivial solution
this Vector goes along the line of
intersections
okay so that's the case of homogeneous
systems and then let's finish with the
other case so the general
case so that means if we look at a
system
axal
B well with B now anything there's two
cases if the determinant of
a is not zero then there's a unique
solution namely x equals a inverse
B if the determinant of a
is zero then it means actually we have
this situation with you know planes that
are all parallel to the same line and
then we have
either no
solution or infinitely many
solutions it cannot be a single
solution now whether you have no
Solutions or infinitely many solutions
well we haven't actually developed the
tools to answer that but if you try
solving the system by hand by
elimination you will see that you end up
maybe with something that says 0 equals
z and you have infinitely many solutions
you know actually if you can find one
solution then you know that there's
infinitely many on the other hand if you
end up with something that's a
contradiction like 1 equals 2 then you
know there's no
Solutions okay so that's the end for
today and two tomorrow we will learn
about parametric equations for lines and
curves